Draft Digital Personal Data Protection Rules 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology) 
 January 5, 2025 
 
Introduction  
 
The draft Digital Personal Data Protection Rules aim to safeguard citizens’ rights for the 
protection of their personal data . These rules seek to operationalize the Digital Personal Data 
Protection Act, 2023  (DPDP Act),  in line with India’s commitment to create  a robust 
framework for protecting digital personal data. 
 
Framed with simplicity and clarity, the rules are designed to empower citizens in a rapidly 
growing digital economy. They seek to protect citizens’ rights in accordance with the DPDP 
Act, while achieving the right balance between regulation and innovation, so that the benefits 
of India’s growing innovation ecosystem are available to all citizens and India’s digital 
economy. They also address spe cific challenges like unauthoris ed commercial use of data, 
digital harms and personal data breaches. 
 
Key features  
 
The rules place citizens at the heart of the d ata protection framework. Data F iduciaries must 
provide clear and accessible information about how personal data is processed, enabling 
informed consent. Citizens are empowered with rights to demand data erasure, appoint digital 
nominees, and access user-friendly mechanisms to manage their data. 
 
The rules empower citizens by giving them greater control over their data. Provisions for 
informed consent, the right to erasure and grievance redressal enhance trust in digital platforms. 
Parents and guardians are empowered to ensure online safety for their children. 
 
Balance between innovation and regulation  
 
India’s model strikes a unique balance between fostering innovation and regulation  to protect 
personal data. Unlike restrictive global frameworks, these rules encourage economic growth 
while prioritizing citizen welfare. Stakeholders view this as a new global template for data 
governance. 
 
The framework envisages lesser compliance burden for small er businesses and startups. A n 
adequate period would be provided so that all stakeholders, from small enterprises to large 
corporates, may transition smoothly to achieve compliance with the new law. 
 
Digital-first approach  
 
The rules embrace a “digital by design” philosophy. Consent mechanisms, grievance redressal 
and the functioning of the Data Protection Board are all envisaged as “born digital”, to ensure 
Ease of Living and Ease of Doing Business. The Board will function as a digital office, with a 

digital platform and app to enable citizens to approach it digitally and to have their complaints 
adjudicated without their physical presence being required. 
From processing complaints to interacting with D ata Fiduciaries, workflows are optimised to 
ensure speed and transparency. This reflects India’s forward -looking approach to governance 
and builds trust between citizens and Data Fiduciaries. 
 
Addressing stakeholder concerns 
 
Businesses benefit from a pragmatic framework. Graded responsibilities cater to startups and 
MSMEs with lower compliance burden , while Significant Data Fiduciaries have higher 
obligations. Sector-specific data protection measures can complement the core personal data 
protection framework created by the Act and the rules. 
 
The Data Protection Board’s digital office approach would ensure  quick and transparent 
resolution of complaints. The Board is required to take into consideration factors such as the 
nature and gravity of  default, efforts made to mitigate impact, etc., while imposing penalties 
for defaults. Further, Data Fiduciaries may voluntarily give undertakings at any stage of 
proceedings, which if accepted by the Board would result in dropping of the same. This 
balances the need to protect the rights of citizens, while  providing a fair adjudicatory 
framework for those processing personal data. 
 
Provisions for annual data protection impact assessments and audits for Significant Data 
Fiduciaries ensure effective arrangements to secure compliance.  
 
Inclusive approach 
 
The draft rules are based on wide ranging inputs gathered from various stakeholders and study 
of global best practices. They are grounded in the principles enshrined in the D PDP Act. The 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology has invited feedback/comments from the 
public and stakeholders till 18.02.2025 through MyGov platform, in line with the 
Government’s commitment to adopt an inclusive approach to law-making.  
 
Awareness initiatives  
 
Recognizing the importance of citizen engagement, the government plans a comprehensive 
awareness campaign. These initiatives will educate citizens about their rights and 
responsibilities under the new framework, fostering a culture of data responsibility. 
 
Through these rules, India demonstrates leadership in shaping an equitable digital future. The 
draft rules are a testament to India’s commitment to ensuring protection of digital personal data 
of citizens while securing innovation-driven and inclusive growth. 
 
Important Links 
❖ Draft Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 
❖ Submission of feedback/comments on Draft Digital Personal Data Protection Rules , 
2025 
❖ Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 
 
DT/KS
