GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
LOK SABHA 
UNSTARRED QUESTION NO. 4091 
TO BE ANSWERED ON: 12.08.2026 
 
RURAL AWARENESS PROGRAMME ON DATA PRINCIPAL 
RIGHTS 
 
4091.   SHRI KARAN BHUSHAN SINGH: 
 
Will the Minister of ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY be pleased to 
state: 
 
(a) the status of phased implementation of the Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 
including functioning of the Data Protection Board of India since 13th November, 2025 and 
preparedness for Consent Manager registration from 13th November, 2026; 
(b) whether Village Level Entrepreneurs operating the over 5.8 lakh Common Service 
Centres (CSCs) who process citizens' Aadhaar, banking and health data daily, qualify as 
"Data Fiduciary" under the Act and their compliance obligations, if any; 
(c)  whether a rural awareness programme on data principal rights — consent, correction, 
erasure and grievance redressal — is proposed through the CSC network particularly in 
aspirational districts such as Gonda; and 
(d) the vernacular/simplified grievance redressal mechanism, if any, being designed for rural 
citizens with limited digital literacy as most CSC users in districts like Gonda lack access to 
formal written consent processes? 
  
ANSWER 
 
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(SHRI JITIN PRASADA) 
 
(a)   to (d):  The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (“Act”) provides for the processing 
of digital personal data in a manner that recognises both the rights of the individual to protect 
their personal data and the need to process such personal data for lawful purposes. 
 
The Act, and the Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 (“Rules”) notified on 13 
November, 2025 provide a timeline for phased implementation of its provisions over an 
eighteen-month transition period, including the establishment of the Data Protectio n Board 
(“Board”). The Rules specify the following implementation timelines: 
●     Phase 1: Establishment and operationalisation of the Data Protection Board of India 
○    As notified, the Board is composed of a Chairperson  and four Members, 
who are to be appointed through a Search -cum-Selection Committee. The 
advertisement for recruitment to the posts of Chairperson and Members was 
published in the Employment News on 6 June 2026. 
○      The Board has to function in a digital manner. 
●      Phase 2 (within one year): Registration and functioning of Consent Managers 
●  Phase 3 (within eighteen months): Compliance obligations for Data Fiduciaries 
including data principal rights, security safeguards and breach notification. 
 

Under the DPDP Act, a Data Fiduciary is any person who alone or in conjunction with others 
determines the purpose and means of processing personal data. A Data Fiduciary, the 
applicable obligations under the Act and Rules would include, when the relevant p rovisions 
come into force: 
●  having a valid contract with the Data Processors 
●  providing valid notices accessible in 22 Indian languages and obtaining consent 
where required; 
●  implementing reasonable security safeguards; 
●  responding to Data Principal requests; 
●  facilitating correction and erasure where applicable; 
●   establishing an effective grievance redressal mechanism and prominently publishing 
on its website or application the period, not exceeding ninety days, within which 
grievances shall be addressed 
●  reporting personal data breaches; and 
●  complying with other obligations prescribed under the Act and Rules. 
 
Key obligations of a data processor (an entity that processes personal data on behalf of a 
data fiduciary): 
● Process data only on behalf of the Data Fiduciary 
● Ensure reasonable security safeguards 
● Comply with contractual and legal requirements specified in the processing contract 
with the Data Fiduciary and support compliance with the DPDP Act 
 
CSC e-Governance Services India Limited provides assisted access to digital services through 
its VLEs, who support citizens in understanding and availing various Government services. 
CSC VLE is not authorised to collect and store any data of citizens durin g the course of 
providing services. Citizens can also access grievance redressal support through the CSC 
Helpdesk (14599), Digital Seva Portal and the State/District CSC network. 
 
Awareness programme: 
Capacity building and public awareness form integral components of the Government's 
strategy for promoting data protection and cyber security. Training programmes are conducted 
across sectors to strengthen IT security capabilities, while public awareness i nitiatives—
including Cyber Security Awareness Month, Safer Internet Day, workshops, conferences, 
expert sessions, and digital outreach campaigns—are undertaken to educate citizens on online 
safety, secure digital transactions, their rights and responsibili ties under the DPDP Act, and 
responsible use of digital services. 
 
Through the combined implementation of legal, technical, institutional, and awareness 
measures, the Government is committed to fostering a secure, resilient, and trustworthy digital 
ecosystem that safeguards the interests of citizens, businesses, and criti cal national 
infrastructure. 
 
******
